---
title: "Is the Future Federated?"
date: 2022-08-27T10:12:48-04:00
draft: true
summary: ""
---

## Blockchain vs Federation

When blockchain technologies first took off, they were supposed to have created an idealistic internet. We were supposed to have decentralized applications that could never be manipulated by a centralized authority. After the hack of The Dao and the fork of Ethereum classic, it is evident that in decentralized apps, monetary incentives are law, not code. Yet even if you still believe in such a promise, crypto whales and the extreme centralization of mining and tokens allows powerful individuals to manipulate cryptocurrencies without touching the code. This isn't even taking into account issues with security. Even if there are no bugs in the currency itself, for users without a tech background, it is particularly risky to manage a system where their private key can automatically drain all funds with no hope of a return. This is an even greater challenge if we expect to participate in an internet where every website asks to connect and verify with Metamask, or something similar. Either we risk users being constantly phished, or we adopt insured and corporate backed multi-sig wallets, which defeat the purpose of crypto to begin with.
I continue to believe that cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Monero can be useful ways to store and transfer digital scarcity, but have yet to see a convincing argument for dapps or daos.

Yet perhaps this was a foolish goal to begin with? When dealing with applications, instead of trying to eliminating trust, why shouldn't we just distribute it? Often times in computing we assume the social sphere has the perfect properties we want in our systems. We are searching for perfection in a setting where perfection cannot actually exist. In DevOps we constantly search for perfect reproducibility, yet often the issue is not in the build system, but rather from the maintainers of the packages themselves. Thus, my point is that we shouldn't make the perfect the enemy of the good. It is okay to have good enough trust and good enough privacy since fundamentally to achieve anything else is immediately suspect.

## Federated Software

With this in mind, I argue that we need to reconsider and once again take up the banner of federated software. After all, the fundamental protocols that makeup the internet are designed to be federated. It is an idea so old it appears to be new. Take SMTP and email for instance: anyone can host a server, choose who to communicate with, and block people according to their own rules. This allows for the creation of a series of decentralized yet still connected internet services. On a large scale, it is something like early America. There is a central government who is theoretically in charge, but realistically, it will never make its way into all the towns. Anyone can go and form their own community, but it will be up to them to make sure the community is fair, lest the members leave. To put it simply, just as early America was an experiment in self government, federated software is an experiment in digital autonomy.

Fundamentally this has been the reason that so many idealists have flocked to platforms like Mastodon, PeerTube, and other ActivityPub-based federated software. Nowhere else on the internet have I seen individuals with such varying political beliefs nonetheless agree on a principle of government. People want communities that are designed to accommodate their values, yet not be so insular so as to pretend others do not exist. Fundamentally the latter was the historical issue with web forums. Without enough outside presence,websites devolve into feedback loops where the most provocative behavior becomes reinforced. With federation this issue still persists (instances can always self-isolate), but the network as a whole is less susceptible to it.

Often critics of big tech sardonically say to 'just make your own platform.' Yet with federated software that is something that can realistically be done. It is straightforward to self host a mastodon, matrix, or Peertube instance and in doing so you have created not only a platform for yourself, but a larger network with which others can be connected. In such a system it is fundamentally impossible to be permanently banned. Yet at the same time instances can be restricted so federation is not spammed or abused. As a caveat, it is impossible to know for sure what may result long term, yet I believe federation has a series of beneficial properties.

- Federated websites are still censorship resistant. They are not perfect, users still have to trust their VPS provider and other fundamental infrastructure. However as we have said, perhaps perfect trust is not particularly reasonable or not even desirable in an application. We want people to still be accountable for their actions.
- Federated services allow for self governance and at least the potential for transparent digital self government. If you are hosting an instance, you have the ability to define a clear set of rules and not be bound by the whims of corporate advertisers.
- Federation goes beyond data privacy and allows for true data autonomy. Instead of relying upon a privacy policy you have direct control over the software itself. You can modify the code and have true volition over the system itself, not just the resulting data.

## Why isn't it more popular?

Yet despite these ideals, we have to be realistic and understand the current scope of federated software. The majority of protocols that can be theoretically federated are the exact opposite. Rather, they are exemplars of centralization. Corporate email providers now account for over a billion users. In the same way, git become known through GitHub instead of vice versa. XMPP has another billion users not through it alone, but through proprietary software like WhatsApp.

Ultimately, I argue that this centralization has resulted from a significant lack of incentive structures. For example, if you wish to host a public Matrix instance you have to buy a domain, rent a VPS ( and a relatively powerful one at that since federation is not trivial computationally), and then deal with all the headaches of server maintenance and software updates. This isn't even taking into account any sort of liabilities you may have from operating a public website. Thus while I admire the social idealism of the federated software community, we need to be realistic if we want widespread adoption. A social network is only as popular as the people on it. A _federated_ social platform can only be called federated if there is an actual incentive and ease of use when federating.

Thus, for all the ills of cryptocurrency the one thing the industry has quickly seen is that monetary incentives will absolutely skyrocket rates of adoption. Even relatively worthless digital assets can help in this regard. It is obvious: when people are monetarily invested they will also be socially invested. We do not need to see money as the antithesis of freedom-respecting federated open source software.

What that incentive will exactly be remains to be seen. Targeted advertisements are difficult since most fediverse users have a general antipathy towards the business of data collection. Cryptocurrency is not particularly better since there is no good way of verifying what it exactly means to create value in a federated system. ( Is value proportional to users, number of associated federated servers, or something different? ) Ultimately it seems like community belonging is the most practical way short term to inspire people to contribute resources. In the same way that people contribute to social organizations, alumni groups, or Churches, it seems like we will need to focus on fostering meaningful online communities. This is obviously easier said than done, yet it leaves me optimistic knowing that federated software can grow in tandem with a revitalization of community networks.

## The Future

In summary, the goal of this article is not necessarily to put forth a claim regarding the definitive solution, but rather to establish that online federated communities need a plan to clear growth plan. If we don't establish that a long term plan is a necessity, new federated technologies like Matrix and Mastodon will end up going the route of email and git. Surely they can be decentralized, but in practice the overwhelming majority users do not use them in such a way.

And so, is federated software the future? It could be, but it is up to us to create socially beneficial online communities that incentivize the fundamental systems underpinning it.
